A paper from a specialist journal written by a leader recognized as a strong
writer.
A “normal” paper from a specialist journal. -- Morgan1968
A review or synthesis paper. -- Hess1963
A paper from Nature or Science or some journal that targets a broad
audience.  -- Vine1963 Dietz1961
Identify what

workshops 2 - 10

wkshop 2: Storytelling
pt1 Identify what you think the key story points are. Did the authors do good
job of highlighting that story? How far along the flow from data to
understanding did the paper go? Could they have taken it further?

pt 2 write
Step . Identify the Key Story Points for your Work.
(This is adapted from an exercise developed Ruth Yanai at SUNY-ESF.4) For each
question, write a short paragraph—no more than two to three sentences. These
identify the essential story elements.
1. What is your opening? This should identify the larger problem to which
you are contributing, give readers a sense of the direction your paper is
going, and make it clear why it is important. It should engage the widest
audience practical.
2. What is your specific question or hypothesis?
3. What are the key results of your work? Identify these in a short list. There
should be no more than four to five main points.

4. What is your main conclusion? What did you learn about nature? This
should use the results from section 3 to answer the question from 2, and
should address the larger problem identified in 1.
Step . Write the Article.
Write a short article describing your research. Your target audience is scientists
who are not specialists in your discipline. You are trying to tell the story of your
work and engage and educate your readers, not write a technical paper. The tone
can range between somewhat technical and more casual, but it must be something
that technical readers would find interesting. Use your answers from step 1 to
frame the story you write in this part of the exercise.
The word limit is strict: 1500+/-100 words.

pt 3 analyze
1. What did the author do well? (It’s always good to start positive.)
2. Was the topic interesting? Was it cast at the right level and hit the right
audience? Could you have rewritten it to engage a wider audience? Did it
make you want to read the rest of the piece?
3. Was the specific question clear?
4. Were the results clear? Did they relate to the topic and the specific
question?
5. Were the Conclusions true conclusions, or were they merely a restatement
of the results? Did they relate to the large issues raised in the opening?
Did they answer the specific question asked? Did they clearly grow from
the results presented in the piece?
6. What did you get as the “take-home” message of the story? Do you
believe that this was the message the author was trying to give you?
7. Was the writing clear? If not, can you figure out why and identify ways to
make it clearer?
