which papers were easiest to read? which ones have ideas that stick in your mind? care to share any ideas?  why were some papers easier to read than others?

dietz 1961:
spreading sea floor theory
- explain seafloor bathymetry
1. large scale thermal convection operates in the mantle
2. crust beneath oceans and continents is different and simple
 (sima vs sial is roughly mafic vs silicic)'
   - why does dietz want us to think moho = change of phase instead of chemistry?
 continental drift: sial sailing through sima -- continents sailing through the basalt -- but strength is similar -- by claiming that the seafloor IS the mantle outcropping dietz is able to solve this issue of relative strength (plates arent really an idea here yet..)
 
 arguments:
 lithosphere = weak
 lithoshpere transition to asthenosphere is gradual
 --> lith no a boundary to convection, and neither is the moho -- thus oceanic crust is fully coupled to the convective mantle
 
 median rises = upwelling and divergence
 trenches associated with downwelling or convergence
 fracture zones mark shears between flow regimes
 high heat under rises = indicative of ascending convection (why? do you agree?)
 
 deep mantle conditions control the convection pattern, not the surface
 
 discussions of lithosphere, crust, moho -- how does it align with your understanding? (these ideas get refined post dietz)
 
 ridges in the middle of oceans because continents moved away from the middle (they rifted symetrically)
 
 implications: earths volume is constant
 sea floor deformation does not support 'sailing through the basalt' ie continental drift. sea floor spreading 'obviates this difficulty' -- continents move WITH the seafloor or stand still while the seafloor subducts (he says shears beneath) -- they do this because they are bouyant
 
 -- how c.c. is made (why it hasnt disappeared. what is freeboard?):
 detritus from continents "carried slowly towards then beneath continents where it is granitized and added anew to the continental blocks"
 
 no old sediments on the sea floor is a huge support for this theory -- also oldest seamounts are not very old.
 
"If this concept were correct,
it would be most useful to apply the term 'crust',
which now has a confusion of meanings, only to any
layer which overlies and caps the convective circula-
tion of the mantle. The sialic continental blocks do
this, so they form the true crust. The ocean floor
seemingly does not, so the ocean basin is 'crustless'."


hess 1962: 
mid ocean ridges have high heat flow and median rifts

what is bilateral assymmetry of the Earth?

what is single cell convection? why invoke this model/catastrophe? (how do you keep the continents from downwelling) -- half the continents made at this time and one third of the oceans

moon from the earth as a hypothesis

replace basalt with serpentizined peridotite in layer 3
- layer 3 is below the moho in hess, but 11 km in dietz
- layer 3 is always ~5km thick
	- inconcievable that basalt flows on the seafloor could be so uniform, should be thick near fissure and thin at great distance
	- instead the thickness must be a present or past isotherm (temperature level) -- basalt to eclogite or hydration of olivine to serpentine. hess favors 2 based on geology/peridotite found in basalt and very little eclogite found in basalt
	
serpentinization cant happen at 20 km due to temp gradients, but thats how much serp you need to account for topography (isostasy) -- so maybe 5km uniform thickness is just serpentinization depth. simple idea and not so far from how we understand it now -- a boundary where partial melting of peridotite occurs  (so a function of T and P).


remnant magnetism shows 1. motion of continents and 2. different motion of continents -- key
"passively riding on the upper part of the convecting cell"

"T h e mid-ocean ridges could represent
the traces of the rising limbs of convection cells, while the circum-Pacific belt
of deformation and volcanism represents clescencling limbs."

velocity lower at ridges (partial melt?)

can anyone explain the role hess thinks erosion plays in the thickness of continents and depth of the sea (Fig 11)

vine and matthews 1963:




